# PlandoRandomSettings

This program is a custom version of the [*Ocarina of Time* randomzier](https://ootrandomizer.com/) that can apply random values to each of the randomizer settings.
This program allows us to blindly randomize anything and (nearly) everything in the randomizer, rather than just the natively supported random settings.

## Download

* [Windows (64-bit)](https://github.com/matthewkirby/plando-random-settings/releases/latest/download/rsl-win64.exe)
* [macOS (Universal)](https://github.com/matthewkirby/plando-random-settings/releases/latest/download/rsl-mac.dmg)
* For other platforms, [request support](https://github.com/matthewkirby/plando-random-settings/issues/new) or [build from source](#building-from-source).

## Usage

When opening the app, you will see the following from top to bottom:

1. The app checks for self-updates when opened. It is recommended that you always update to the latest available version, since older versions may break with newer versions of the randomizer.
2. For the Base ROM, select your copy of *Ocarina of Time*. Please see [the randomizer's readme](https://github.com/TestRunnerSRL/OoT-Randomizer#installation) for details.
3. For the Output Directory, select a folder where the files generated by the randomizer should be saved.
4. Next, select your preferred weights (i.e. how likely each value of each setting will be). The options are:
    * **League:** The Random Settings League's season 2 tournament weights. Uses [version 5.2.117 R-1](https://github.com/Roman971/OoT-Randomizer/tree/b670183e9aff520c20ac2ee65aa55e3740c5f4b4) of the randomizer. See [this file](https://github.com/matthewkirby/plando-random-settings/blob/master/assets/weights/rsl.json) for the full list.
    * **Solo:** Like League weights but uses the latest version of the randomizer.
    * **Co-op:** Limits the maximum number of required skull tokens to 50, disables Master Quest, and fixes the damage multiplier to normal.
    * **Multiworld:** This disables settings that can cause seeds to take a long time, such as closed Door of Time, Overworld entrance randomizer, or useless hints. It also disables Skip Child Zelda to avoid [this bug](https://github.com/TestRunnerSRL/OoT-Randomizer/issues/1210).
    * **Custom:** Allows you to fully customize the weights.
5. For League weights, there are no further options, to avoid accidental misconfigurations. For other presets, you can now optionally remove tricks from logic and/or turn off the possibility of starting with random items. For custom weights, configure them to your liking. You can also export them to a file, or import weights from a file (see [the next section](#weights-files) for details on these files).
6. For Multiworld weights, select the number of players (also called the world count) using the slider or text box.
7. Click “Generate Seed”. This can occasionally take a while, since it makes up to 60 attempts at generating a seed of the randomizer crashes (20 distributions, each tried 3 times). Once done, the output directory will contain the patch file that you can send to the players (or apply the patch for yourself with [the randomizer](https://ootrandomizer.com/generator) by selecting “Generate From Patch File”), as well as the spoiler log and a copy of the settings distributions (which is also considered a spoiler in the Random Settings League).

## Weights files

A weights file is a configuration file for the app. See [the league weights file](https://github.com/matthewkirby/plando-random-settings/blob/master/assets/weights/rsl.json) for an example. You can also generate them using the Save File button in the Custom tab. Here's a detailed file format spec: It is a [JSON](https://json.org/) object with the following entries:

* `"hash"`: An array of two strings representing the hash icon prefix. The accepted names are the same as those in spoiler logs.
* `"worldCount"`: For multiworld, the number of worlds to generate. Defaults to `1`.
* `"disabledLocations"`: An array of excluded location names, same format as in spoiler logs.
* `"allowedTricks"`: An array of logically allowed tricks, same format as in spoiler logs.
* `"randomStartingItems"`: Whether or not to add random starting items (in addition to `"startingItems"`, `"startingSongs"`, and `"startingEquipment"`, if specified). The number of random starting items will follow a geometric distribution: 50% chance of no random starting items, 25% chance of 1, 12.5% chance of 2, etc.
* `"startingItems"`: An array of main starting items, same format as in spoiler logs.
* `"startingSongs"`: An array of starting songs, same format as in spoiler logs.
* `"startingEquipment"`: An array of starting equipment, same format as in spoiler logs.
* `"weights"`: An array of weights rules. A weights rule is an object containing the entry `"setting"` specifying the spoiler log name for the setting this rule will generate, as well as one of the following:
    * To randomize the setting to a number, use the entries `"min"` and `"max"` to specify the range (both inclusive), as well as the entry `"distribution"` which should be `"uniform"` to make each number in the range equally likely or `"geometric"` to give the lowest number a 50% chance, the next a 25% chance, and so on (the two highest numbers will be equally likely).
    * For any other kind of setting, use the entry `"values"` containing an object with each possible value of the setting mapped to an integer indicating how likely it should be relative to the other values. For example, `{"true": 1, "false": 6}` gives a simple on/off setting a 1/7 chance to be enabled.
        * An optional entry `"conditionals"` allows generating different weights depending on the values of settings that have already been generated (which means the must be above this setting in the `"weights"` array). The entry is an array of objects, each with the following entries:
            * `"setting"`: The name of the setting whose value to check.
            * `"conditions"`: An array of values of that setting for which this conditional will be used.
            * `"values"`: The weights to use if any of the condition is met, in the same format as the base `"values"` entry (which will be used if no conditionals apply).

## Building from source

1. Install Rust:
    * On Windows, download and run [rustup-init.exe](https://win.rustup.rs/) and follow its instructions.
    * On other platforms, please see [the Rust website](https://www.rust-lang.org/learn/get-started) for instructions.
2. (Skip this step if you're not on Windows.) If you're on Windows, you'll also need to download and install [Visual Studio](https://visualstudio.microsoft.com/vs/) (the Community edition should work). On the “Workloads” screen of the installer, make sure “Desktop development with C++” is selected. (Note that [Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/) is not the same thing as Visual Studio. You need VS, not VS Code.)
3. Install [Python](https://python.org/) version 3.6 or higher, making sure to check the “add to PATH” option.
4. Download and extract [this repository](https://github.com/matthewkirby/plando-random-settings/archive/master.zip)
5. Open a command line in the extracted folder:
    * On Windows, locate the folder in File Explorer, then right-click it while holding shift and select “Open PowerShell window here” or “Open command prompt here”.
    * On other platforms, open a command line and navigate to the folder using `cd`.
6. In the command line, run one of the following commands. Depending on your computer, this may take a while.

    To install the command-line version:

    ```sh
    cargo install --path=crate/rsl-cli
    ```

    To install the main app:

    ```sh
    cargo install --path=crate/rsl-gui
    ```
7. You can now launch the app by running the command `rsl-gui`, and/or use the command-line version `rsl` (see `rsl --help` for details).

## Releasing a new version

You will need a 64-bit Windows PC. To release the version for macOS as well, you will also need a Mac.

1. If the randomizer version for league seeds should be updated, change the constants `LEAGUE_COMMIT_HASH` and `LEAGUE_VERSION` in `crate/ootr/src/lib.rs` accordingly. `LEAGUE_COMMIT_HASH` is the commit hash for the Dev-R version to be used, which can be copied using the clipboard button at <https://github.com/Roman971/OoT-Randomizer/commits/Dev-R>, and `LEAGUE_VERSION` is the contents of the `__version__` variable in `version.py` in that commit.
2. Bump the version number in:
    * `assets/macos/RSL.app/Contents/Info.plist` (change `CFBundleShortVersionString` to the new version number and increment `CFBundleVersion` by 1)
    * `crate/ootr/Cargo.toml`
    * `crate/rsl/Cargo.toml`
    * `crate/rsl-cli/Cargo.toml`
    * `crate/rsl-gui/Cargo.toml`
    * `crate/rsl-updater/Cargo.toml`
    * `crate/rsl-utils/Cargo.toml`
    * `crate/rslbot/Cargo.toml`
3. Push the changes
4. On macOS (if releasing for macOS):
    1. Install [Rust](https://rust-lang.org/) and [Python](https://python.org/).
    2. Make sure your Rust compiler can build for both Intel and ARM:
        ```sh
        rustup target add x86_64-apple-darwin
        rustup target add aarch64-apple-darwin
        ```
    3. Clone this repo.
    4. In System Preferences → Sharing, make sure Remote Login is enabled and you have access.
5. On Windows:
    1. [Create a GitHub personal access token](https://github.com/settings/tokens/new) with the public_repo scope.
    1. Install [Rust](https://rust-lang.org/) and [Python](https://python.org/).
    2. Clone this repo.
    3. In the repo clone, create a [JSON](https://json.org/) object at `assets\release-config.json` with the following entries:
        * `"githubToken"`: The personal access token from step 1
        * `"macHostname"`: A hostname or IP address (and if necessary the username, in `"username@hostname"` form) at which your Mac is reachable via SSH (optional, if not given no macOS app is included in the release)
        * `"macRepoPath"`: The path to the clone of this repo on your Mac (optional, if not given no macOS app is included in the release)
        * `"releaseNotesEditor"`: A command that will be called with `--wait` and the path to an empty file for writing the release notes (optional, defaults to `"C:\\Program Files\\Microsoft VS Code\\bin\\code.cmd"`)
        * `"repoOwner"`: The GitHub user or org where the release should be published (optional, defaults to `"matthewkirby"`)
        * `"repoName"`: The name of the repository where the release should be published (optional, defaults to `"plando-random-settings"`)
    4. In the repo, run `cargo run --release --package=rsl-utils --bin=rsl-release`. You can add the following command-line options, but must separate them from the required options with a single `--` (so they're interpreted as `rsl-release` options, not `cargo` options):
        * To see output of build commands as they are happening, use `--verbose`. Note that this may considerably slow down the release script since it won't run multiple build commands in parallel.
        * To create the GitHub release as a draft but not publish it, use `--no-publish`.
